#labels Phase-Support
<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />

= General =
== What is the difference between Hamake and Cascading? ==

In short: [http://www.cascading.org/ Cascading] is a framework, while 'hamake' is a tool. Some differences:
  * hamake does not require any custom programming. It helps to automate running your existing Hadoop tasks and PIG scripts
  * We found hamake especially suitable for incremental processing of datasets
  * You can use 'hamake' to automate tasks written in other languages, using _Hadoop streaming_

== Why XML and not JSON? ==

XML is broadly used in workflow processes description (e.g. BPEL, XPDL) 

== Is there a way to query a workflow's progress to get a percentage complete? ==

Currently no

== Why not ANT? == 

[http://wiki.apache.org/ant/AntWeaknessesAndProblems Ant is not a workflow engine]

== Where executables are executed? == 

_exec_ task launches binaries and shell scripts locally on a machine, where Hamake is running. _mapred_ and _pig_ jobs are sent to !JobTracker that you've configured

== How Hamake differs from Oozie and Azkaban? ==

 # Oozie and Azkaban are server-side systems that requires complex installation and long study. Hamake is a client-side lightweight tool that does not require installation and has very simple syntax for workflow definition. 
 # Hamake is built based on dataflow programming principles - your Hadoop tasks are controlled by its data. 
 # Azkaban and Oozie allows more functionality at the cost of more complex configuration and learning curve